matiriha guṇasaktā bandhakṛtteṣvasaktā
tvamṛtakṛduparundhe bhaktiyogastu saktim |
mahadanugamalabhyā bhaktirevātra sādhyā
kapilatanuriti tvaṃ devahūtyai nyagādī: ||1||
mati: iha	the intellect, here (in this world)
guṇa-saktā	which is attached to the Gunas (and so to the sense objects)
bandhakṛt-	is the cause of bondage
teṣu-asaktā tu-	if it (the intellect) is not attached to them (the sense objects)
amṛta-kṛt-	(then) it is the cause of liberation
uparundhe	(but) prevents
bhaktiyoga:-tu	the path of devotion, indeed
saktim	(whereas) attachment
mahat-anugama-labhyā bhakti:-	devotion which arises from following holy men
eva-atra sādhyā	alone should be sought here
kapila-tanu:-iti tvaṃ	Thou incarnate as Kapil, thus
devahūtyai nyagādī:	instructed Devahooti
In this world when the intellect gets attached to the sense objects, which are the product of the three Gunas, it becomes the cause of bondage. Otherwise, it leads to liberation. The path of devotion indeed prevents attachment. Devotion which arises from following holy men alone should be sought after. Thou incarnate as Kapila thus instructed Devahooti.
prakṛtimahadahaṅkārāśca mātrāśca bhūtā-
nyapi hṛdapi daśākṣī pūruṣa: pañcaviṃśa: |
iti viditavibhāgo mucyate'sau prakṛtyā
kapilatanuriti tvaṃ devahūtyai nyagādī: ||2||
prakṛti-mahat-ahaṅkārā:-ca	Prakriti, Mahat, Ahankaar and
mātrā:-ca	the five Tanmaatraas
bhūtāni-api	and also the five elements
hṛt-api	and the mind
daśa-ākṣī	the ten Indriyaas
pūruṣa: pañcaviṃśa	the Purusha as the twenty fifth
iti vidita-vibhāga:	knowing these divisions
mucyate-asau prakṛtyā	he is released from Prakriti
kapila-tanu:-iti tvaṃ	incarnate as Kapil, Thou
devahūtyai nyagādī:	instructed Devahooti
Prakriti, (Primordial Nature), Mahat-tatva (the great Spirit),Ahankaara (I sense), the five Tanmaatraas (sound, smell, touch, form, taste), the five Bhootaas (subtle elements- space,air,fire, water, earth), Antahkarana (mind and its various modes), the ten Indriyaas (Organs, five of knowledge-hearing, seeing, touch, taste smell, and five of action-speech,hands,legs,anus,genitals), and Purush (Atman), these are the twentyfive categories. When the Purusha realizes the distinctiveness of these categories, he is liberated from the bondage of Prakriti.Thus Thou incarnate as Kapila, instructed Devahooti.
prakṛtigataguṇaughairnājyate pūruṣo'yaṃ
yadi tu sajati tasyāṃ tat guṇāstaṃ bhajeran |
madanubhajanatattvālocanai: sā'pyapeyāt
kapilatanuriti tvaṃ devahūtyai nyagādī: ||3||
prakṛti-gata-guṇa-aughai:-	by the many attributes of Prakriti
na-ājyate pūruṣa:-ayaṃ	this Purusha is not tainted
yadi tu sajati tasyāṃ	but if he becomes attached to Prakriti
tat guṇā:-taṃ bhajeran	the attributes of Prakriti attach themselves to him
mat-anubhajana-	by constant worship to me
tat-tu-ālocanai:	and by enquiring into My real nature
sā-api-apeyāt	that Prakriti also will leave (her hold)
kapilatanu:-iti tvaṃ	a human descent as Kapil Thou
devahūtyai nyagādī:	instructed Devahooti
The Purusha, by itself, is free from the attributes of Prakriti, but if he identifies himself with Prakriti, then the attributes of Prakriti attach themselves to him. Prakriti will leave its hold on Purusha if he constantly worships Me and enquires into My real nature. Thou incarnate as Kapila thus instructed Devahooti.
vimalamatirupāttairāsanādyairmadaṅgaṃ
garuḍasamadhirūḍhaṃ divyabhūṣāyudhāṅkam |
rucitulitatamālaṃ śīlayetānuvelaṃ
kapilatanuriti tvaṃ devahūtyai nyagādī: ||4||
vimala-mati:-	one who has purified his mind
upāttai:-āsana-ādyai:-	by control of the senses by meditative postures
mat-aṅgam garuḍa-samadhirūḍham	should, (meditate on) My form mounted on Garuda
divya-bhūṣā-āyudha-aṅkam	adorned with divine ornaments and divine weapons
ruci-tulita-tamālam	resembling a Tamaala tree in lustre
śīlayeta-anuvelaṃ	should meditate on constantly
kapila-tanu: iti tvaṃ	a human descent as Kapila, Thou
devahūtyai nyagādī:	instructed Devahooti
Having purified the mind by control of the senses and by meditative postures, one should constantly meditate on My form, adorned with divine ornaments and weapons, seated on Garuda and blue and lustrous like the Tamaala tree. Thus ,Thou instructed Devahooti incarnate as Kapila.
mama guṇagaṇalīlākarṇanai: kīrtanādyai-
rmayi surasaridoghaprakhyacittānuvṛtti: |
bhavati paramabhakti: sā hi mṛtyorvijetrī
kapilatanuriti tvaṃ devahūtyai nyagādī: ||5||
mama-guṇa-gaṇa-līlā-ākarṇanai:	by listening to My many excellences and sportive activities
kīrtana-ādyai:	(and) by chanting My name etc.
mayi	in Me,
sura-sarit-ogha-prakhya-citta-anuvṛtti:	in which the mind flows in a continuous stream like that of Ganga
bhavati parama-bhakti:	is born that supreme devotion
sā hi	that (devotion) alone
mṛtyo:-vijetrī	is the conqueror of the cycle of birth and death
kapila-tanu:-iti tvaṃ	a human descent as Kapil Thou
devahūtyai nyagādī:	instructed Devahooti
By regularly listening to My excellences and My sportive deeds and by chanting My name, the supreme devotion is born. This devotion in which the mind flows in an uninterrupted stream towards Me, like the Ganga flows towards the sea, alone can conquer the cycle of birth and death. Thus, Thou incarnate as Kapil, instructed Devahooti.
ahaha bahulahiṃsāsañcitārthai: kuṭumbaṃ
pratidinamanupuṣṇan strījito bālalālī |
viśati hi gṛhasakto yātanāṃ mayyabhakta:
kapilatanurititvaṃ devahūtyai nyagādī: ||6||
ahaha	Alas!
bahula-hiṃsā-sañcita-arthai:	with wealth earned by many cruel and unfair means
kuṭumbaṃ	ones family
pratidinam-anupuṣṇan	everyday feeding
strījita:	controlled over by wife
bālalālī	fondly loving the children
viśati hi	attains indeed
gṛhasakta:	intensely attached to his house
yātanāṃ	sufferings (of hell)
mayi-abhakta:	one who is not devoted to Me
kapil-tanu:-iti tvaṃ	a human descent as Kapil, Thou
devahūtyai nyagādī:	instructed Devahooti
Alas! Men acquire wealth by unfair and cruel means for the support of their own families and are in subservience to women's charms and love of children. Being devoid of devotion to Me, intensely attached to the worldly possessions, they are led to the sufferings of hell. Thus, Thou instructed Devahooti, as Kapil incarnate.
yuvatijaṭharakhinno jātabodho'pyakāṇḍe
prasavagalitabodha: pīḍayollaṅghya bālyam |
punarapi bata muhyatyeva tāruṇyakāle
kapilatanuriti tvaṃ devahūtyai nyagādī: ||7||
yuvati-jaṭhara-khinna:	suffering in the womb of a young woman (mother)
jāta-bodha:-api-akāṇḍe	even though suddenly getting the knowledge of Reality
prasava-galita-bodha:	losing that knowledge immediately on birth
pīḍayā-ullaṅghya bālyaṃ	spending childhood afflicted with ailments
puna:-api bata muhyati-eva	again is infatuated alas!
tāruṇya-kāle	during youth
kapila-tanu:-iti tvaṃ	a human descent as Kapil, Thou
devahūtyai nyagādī:	instructed Devahooti
Repeatedly entering the womb for rebirth, the Jiva though retains the memory of the Supreme Reality, he loses it during the travails of birth. After going through various sufferings of childhood, he enters the stage of youth, when he once again is overcome by the infatuation of sense life. Thus, Thou incarnate as Kapil, instructed Devahooti.
pitṛsuragaṇayājī dhārmiko yo gṛhastha:
sa ca nipatati kāle dakṣiṇādhvopagāmī |
mayi nihitamakāmaṃ karma tūdakpathārthaṃ
kapiltanuriti tvaṃ devahūtyai nyagādī: ||8||
pitṛ-sura-gaṇa-yājī	one who performs sacrifices to ancestors and gods
dhārmika: ya: gṛhastha:	a householder who performs righteous deeds
sa ca nipatati kāle	and he comes back (to this earth) in due course
dakṣiṇa-adhva-upagāmī	going (led by) the Southern path
mayi nihitam-	dedicated to Me
akāmaṃ karma tu-	(doing) desireless actions, however
udak-pathārthaṃ	is led by the Northern path
kapil-tanu:-iti tvaṃ	a human descent as Kapila, Thou ,thus
devahūtyai nyagādī:	instructed Devahooti
A virtuous householder who makes sacrificial offerings to forefathers (Pitris) and gods (Devas), goes by the Southern path after death, and is born again when he has enjoyed the fruits of his meritorious deeds.Those who live by performing desireless actions as offerings to Me, go by the Northern path, after death. Thus Thou instructed Devahooti, incarnate as Kapila.
iti suviditavedyāṃ deva he devahūtiṃ
kṛtanutimanugṛhya tvaṃ gato yogisaṅghai: |
vimalamatirathā'sau bhaktiyogena muktā
tvamapi janahitārthaṃ vartase prāgudīcyām ||9||
iti suvidita-vedyāṃ	thus who had known well what is to be known
deva he	O Lord!
devahūtiṃ kṛtanutim-	to Devahooti who was praising Thee
anugṛhya tvaṃ gata:	having blessed, Thou departed
yogi-saṅghai:	along with a group of Yogis
vimala-mati:-atha-asau	she (Devahooti) who had become pure in mind
bhakti-yogena muktā	was liberated by the path of devotion
tvam-api jana-hita-artham	Thou also for the good of the people
vartase	do stay
prāk-udīcyām	in the North East
O Lord! Having thus known all that was to be known, Thou blessed Devahooti, who was singing Thy praise. She had attained the purity of mind and was liberated by following the path of devotion. Thou also left with a group of ascetics and Thou do stay even now, in the North East for the good of the people.
parama kimu bahūktyā tvatpadāmbhojabhaktiṃ
sakalabhayavinetrīṃ sarvakāmopanetrīm |
vadasi khalu dṛḍhaṃ tvaṃ tadvidhūyāmayān me
gurupavanapureśa tvayyupādhatsva bhaktim ||10||
parama	O Supreme Lord!
kimu bahūktyā	what more to say
tvat-pad-ambhoja-bhaktiṃ	devotion to Thy lotus feet
sakala-bhaya-vinetrīm	removes all fears
sarva-kāma-upanetrīm	and fulfills all desires
vadasi khalu dṛḍhaṃ tvaṃ	Thou (Thyself) do firmly declare indeed
tat-vidhūya-āmayān me	therefore eradicating my ailments
gurupavanapureśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
tvayi-upādhatsva bhaktim	endow me with devotion to Thee
O Supreme Lord! What more do I say? Thou have firmly declared that devotion to Thy lotus feet removes all fears and fulfills all desires. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Therefore, eradicating all my ailments, endow me with devotion to Thee.